---
title: Transcript of API Community Workshop, 19th January 2021
weight: 502
keywords: 'APIs' 'API Community'
identifier: DSA-006
name: APICommunityJan21Transcript
organisation: Data Standards Authority
status: Active
startDate: 2021-01-19
dateAdded: 2021-01-29
dateUpdated: 2021-01-29
---

# API & Data Exchange Community Event, 19/01/2021

# 

## 1. DSA API Programme (Charles Baird, Data Standards Authority)

**Charles Baird**

Okay, morning everyone. Thank you all for joining. And thank you Sarah
for arranging all this. So far I think you can tell the difference in
professionalism between this one and the one I ran in a very amateurish
way a few months ago. So, thank goodness for Sarah.

I'm going to talk about the DSA API programme that we're expanding at
the moment. Last time I spoke about the API catalogue, I think, probably
for maybe half the people here, I have bent your ears over the last few
months about the API catalogue. I won't only bang on about that today
but there will be something about that later. But we have expanded how
we think about - I'm going to say "offering" a lot today so I apologise,
we've expanded the offering around APIs, and we've tried to make it a
little bit more comprehensive, so I'm just going to take you through
that today.

And then, as Sarah mentioned, do put any questions either in the Teams
chat, or in the Slack channel which has been set up for this. Also,
there's a copy of my slides in the relevant Slack channel if you want to
have a look at those. I mean, I don't know why you would, but knock
yourselves out(!)

So, the DSA API offering. What is that? Obviously, the DSA is a
relatively new team. And we've been working out what we are trying to do
over the last few months. Some of the API programme is stuff we've
inherited that we're building on. You know, the API catalogue's one of
those, the API standards, and some excellent work in progress on API
management and things like that. But we just wanted to pull it all
together into something a little bit more coherent, which maps kind of
very roughly to the notion of an API lifecycle.

So the first thing is the community. That's you guys, AKA the place
where we nick all our ideas. We'll come back to this, but obviously
these meetings are crucial, that's why we want to do them more often.
Your input into what we're doing is crucial, and really steers
everything that we do.

Just to run through these, the rest of these. Stakeholder guidance, or
high level guidance around APIs which we're producing; the next version
of the API standards - version 3 - which we are hoping to publish in the
next two or three months; an API assessment programme which we're
standing up with an initial peer review next month; the api.gov.uk
domain, which some of you know about already, which we are formalising
this year; the API catalogue, as previously trailed, which I will come
back to later; and guidance around API management.

So, to take those in order. Here is a picture of, just for nostalgia, of
when we actually used to be able to meet and talk about this kind of
stuff. The good news is that although we can't meet in person, the
numbers of people who are interacting with this group is going up, and
as Sarah mentioned, the sister group, the GDAC community for data
architects, and we've also got the data sharing practitioners group,
who, which is also going to run out of the DSA, and all of which we are
hoping to cross post to, if you like - just use as a way to expand the
scope of these things.

And the main thing about the community, apart from it's lovely to do
these workshops and meet you all and chat about APIs, is that we get you
to talk about APIs and how they're developed.

That's the idea behind the new Slack channel, which I will not stop
banging the drum for and boring everyone about. As we've already
mentioned, there are channels there for each of the talks today, and a
lot of the stuff I'm going to talk about today is experimental or, you
know, continuous iteration, and this is one of them. We want to see how
it goes. We feel like there's a real possibility that we can keep a
conversation going in between these meetings, and just in general. And
that's going to tie in with a couple of other things I'm going to
mention. But if you can, if you do get access to, if you can get access
to Slack in your department, then please do. If you can't, obviously
it's no big deal, we've got other ways of keeping in touch, but if you
can please do.

We're also developing a data, well, what started life as a data
standards catalogue. So, this looks a lot like the API catalogue
because, you know, we're obviously all about reuse. We're looking to
both use this as a place to hold the standards that we endorse as an
authority, but also it's about working in the open. We're going to do
drafting on this. As you can see, it is the front end of a GitHub repo.
And the next version, this is Terence Eden's draft reference
architecture. The idea of having this in here is that you can raise
issues in GitHub to comment on it, and we can bolt those in.

And similarly, the next version of the API standards is going to be,
well, is on there right now. And when we put this live over the next
week, I'll send out a link to the group so that you can start to have a
look at that. And again it's just about working in the open. It's about
making sure that when we are putting this stuff together, everyone has
an opportunity to comment, and can see that their comments have been,
you know, at least considered, even if not included. But the nice thing
about GitHub obviously is that it gives us the best way to see the
history of everyone's contributions.

And yeah, I'm about to move on, but I can't emphasise enough the
importance of the community and of you guys' input into this. It really
drives everything we do. We're a small team and we can't do everything
we'd like to. And so, yeah, stealing your ideas for this stuff is
crucial to our strategy.

So into the kind of products. The first one I mentioned, and mapping to
the API lifecycle, is stakeholder guidance. This is envisioned as
guidance to answer the age old question, which I get asked an awful lot,
"What is an API and why should I care?" This is, I mean, this might just
be personal stuff but I do seem to get asked a lot, "What's an API?",
and it would be great if there was just a document that I could point to
and go, "Here you go, here's an explanation." So we're going to build
that, we're going to build, slightly less facetiously, a more thorough
document which talks about the benefits of going API-first as an
organisation. So, what we'd ideally like this to be at the end is a
resource that you can take to senior stakeholders, and say, these are,
well, take them to them, or just use it in your own presentations, and
say, "Here are the reasons why we want to do this, and here are the
benefits that will come out of this."

So yeah, into the next product which is the next version of the
standards. Version 2 was published in late 2019, and we've been
consulting with various people in the intervening time to take
suggestions about what should be added. There are various kind of
technical aspects that we want to add. As you can see, to come back to
the API, sorry, the data standards catalogue, this is the draft version
that is on the front end of the data standards catalogue. Similarly,
it's just a front end to a markdown file in the repo, which you can go
in and examine and make comments on bits of and tell us which bits are
wrong and which bits are right. We're looking to - we're not going to
change loads, I mean, it's a successful document - we are looking to
take instructions, if you like, or comments on what the, if the
structure of it is correct, if it goes into enough technical detail,
goes into too much technical detail.

We're looking to add some technologies that are currently not covered,
specifically GraphQL which we're talking to a few of you about at the
moment about how we slot that into the standards. And again, what's
gonna happen is when this becomes a consultation, we're going to - I'm
just seeing a question in the background: the access to these documents
is going to be on the data standards catalogue, which is on our GitHub
repo which I will share the details with, not today because it is still
behind locked doors while we smooth some rough edges, but certainly in
the next week.

Yeah. So when I share that out, one of the first things we will ask is,
please go and read the draft of the version 3 standards, and give us
your thoughts, and we will fold those into the publishing process. It
should be stressed, this isn't a formal publishing platform, this isn't
any kind of replacement for the stuff we put on GOV.UK. This is
literally just where we put drafts, for the, again, something I'm gonna
be saying a lot today, so that we can work it in.

So yeah, drafted in the open, and specifically adding new technology,
specifically GraphQL. But again, you know, we're driven by the
community. If you feel like we're missing something that's crucial,
please let us know.

So one of the big new things is the API assessment. We, this is again
working on, building on some foundations from last year. We envisage
this as happening in two stages. We are looking at, in the first stage,
doing some proof of concept peer reviews, so we've got a few volunteers
with APIs, we want them to be reviewed. We've got some volunteer
architects from across government. And, side note, we're always looking
for more, so if there's anyone on this call or in this group who'd like
to be on our panel of assessors, please drop me a line, either on Slack
- yet another pitch - or I think most of you have got my email address
by now, but let me know if not, and I will share it.

Yeah, so the first process is going to be peer review sessions with
various APIs so that we can get the format together. And we're still
talking about how this is going to work, but I can sort of envision it
as having two strands. One which is the kind of less formal peer review,
where it is, a group of architects or technical experts will come in and
look at it and make, just make suggestions about the design. I think
people are always looking for ways to improve. And this would be a very
kind of low pressure way to do that.

The flip side of this is that we would like to get to a stage where we
can do automated testing of APIs. So, it's a, unlike the kind of GDS
service assessment process, an API is a technical standard which can
meet certain technical, tick certain technical boxes. So, we feel like
we could probably build an automated testing suite which can prove that
this API is standards compliant, stable and secure, and I've put out
there because it's such a natty phrase.

We've sort of envisioned this, again, you know, this is very much in
alpha at the moment, but we'd sort of envision this tying in with both
the domain, which we'll come to in a minute, and the API catalogue, so
that you can see that the APIs that are on those, that have a domain or
that are on the API catalogue, have met these standards and so that the
end user can tell that these APIs are - I shouldn't read the comments
because "strong and stable" is going to make me laugh, but yes, strong
and stable APIs, which does lead neatly on to the API domain.

So we've been running api.gov.uk for a while. There are a few
organisations using it at the moment. We are just about to produce
updated guidance to applying for and getting a domain on there. That
should be published in the next few weeks. We, GDS, how GDS manages
domains in general is in flux at the moment, so we feel like sometime
during this year we will need to set up a formal domain registry around
api.gov.uk. Further information as I get it, but it is, it is likely
that the process will evolve. At the moment it's very informal, you
basically email us and say, I'd like one, and we check what the API,
what state the API’s in and how, what you've called it, etc. You can
tell what we do on GOV.UK. And then we just say yeah that's fine.

But longer term this is going to be a more formal process, and we would
like it to be linked to the technical assessment, and to the catalogue
so that, as I say, if you have got an API which has got an api.gov.uk
domain, that an end user can tell that that has met certain, certain
technical standards, and that it's reliable. It is another, it is a
badge, if you like. Another way of ensuring data integrity and data
quality from APIs. And I think what usually happens at these meetings
where I've mentioned these tests and these, and this assessment process
is that obviously there are different levels of what an API can cope
with, then designed into the beginning. And so one of the big things
that we're looking at, at the moment, is levels here, so that if your
API is something that's only really designed to be accessed
intermittently or by a few people that we, that we'll find ways to to
foreground that in the catalogue.

So, moving on to the catalogue. This, I try not to waffle on too much
about this, I obviously have done presentations about this before and
talked to you all, or many of you individually about this. The API
catalogue which we started to do serious engagement for in mid late last
year is now got about 200 APIs on there from about 25 departments. And
it is to be frank, a little bit stalled. It's, we've been concentrating
on the big data producing departments, and I think we've probably got as
many APIs that way, in terms of working with people there, as we're
going to get.

One focus for us now is to reach out to smaller departments and arm's
length bodies and just try and engage with them on this, work out how we
do that. But there has been a slight change in direction in terms of how
we think about the catalogue, and that's that we're going to move to
what we euphemistically describe as a "hub and spoke" model, that there
is, that there is, the central catalogue will stay there and will still
be a front door for government APIs, but we're gonna concentrate on
working with departments to get their, get their API up, their internal
API platforms to talk to the central one automatically. You know, it
would be nice if the API catalogue was updated by API, if not, if only
for meta reasons. So we're working with a couple of partner departments
at the moment with the Home Office, with DWP, who are in various
different, various different degrees of maturity in terms of API
management, and we're working out how best we can hook into those
systems.

We are also talking to various vendors to work out how we can do this
programmatically from other systems. And as I said, we are still doing
engagement so if you're on the call and you've got an API that's not on
there, do let us know - we're not changing the model that much. If you
go to the catalogue and click the submit button, we will gladly take
your APIs. So yeah, the new model for the API catalogue. Somewhat
decentralised in that we're concentrating on the partner departments at
the moment.

What I didn't mention was user research, because we have been very
focused on data producers and API producers so far. And we'd like to
make sure the catalogue works for the end user. So, we're talking to a
lot of developers, a lot of product teams about what information they
would like to see for exposing the API catalogue, to just, to reduce
overhead, so that you get, so that it's, as a product, it becomes
hopefully more and more relevant to people.

And yeah, we're working with various smaller organisations to try and
get them both to use the API catalogue, in some, in a couple of cases to
use it as their own kind of documentation hub. So, the API catalogue,
which you may or may not know can can publish Swagger docs, can publish
open API specs and as I say, for a couple of smaller departments we're
looking at ways to be that front end, that we can take your OAS, and
publish it as documentation on the, in the API catalogue, so you, if you
don't have API an external developer portal, you can use us for that.

And finally, the, our thinking around API Management. So we've got, we
know that departments have got varying levels of maturity in terms of
internal API management, and we're trying to address, or work with,
departments who are at all different, all levels, in that sense. So,
we're working together in the first instance on an expanded and updated
set of guidance around API management and that's work that was started
last year that we want to polish up and finalise.

To that end, we're working with some vendors to find kind of
commonalities and best practice in API Management. We're working with
lots of different departments to find out how they do internal API
Management, both so they can contribute to the catalogue but also so
that we can expose their best practice. What we sort of envisioned this,
how we sort of envisioned this as going, is that the initial guidance
will turn into a sort of umbrella, so that we have got, it will cover
lots of different aspects, it will be relatively high level.

And then after that we'll start to do much more technical deep dives
into specific problem spaces. So, I don't know, off the top of my head,
how you do OAuth, how you do endpoint security, how you do X, Y and Z.
We want to, by the end of this process, we'd like to have a set of
guides that can help you start one of those off. And to that end, we're
partnering with vendors who are in this area and trying to work out
which of them are best placed in specific problem sets.

Sarah earlier mentioned the API Management event which is going to be
happening in April, there'll be a couple of vendors who are speaking
there, but also we're going to start bringing them into these things
going forward. So they can present on problems that their products can
solve. Most excitingly from our perspective is that we're going to
hopefully, well, we're in early talks with the GOV.UK PaaS team about
doing some reference implementations of management software on PaaS so
that we can offer kind of easy on-ramp to API Management in the Cloud,
for people who don't know where to start, don't have the resource to get
going, or are in some way struggling.

And that is a neat and completely unplanned segue into the main point of
this. The point of the API programme in general is not to come in and
tell everyone how you should be doing API, you know, how you should be
doing APIs, how you should be running your API programme. It's to try
and offer help and support at each level. So, we're supported by you,
the community. And then after that we can hopefully offer assistance at
all levels. We can help you persuade stakeholders how to do it. We can
make sure that you're adhering to standards, and then give you some
formal assessment on that. We can provide a domain, which shows that,
shows an end user that you are, you've been validated by that assessment
process. We can get you in the catalogue which gets your APIs out to a
much larger audience. And finally we can help with API management and
specific problems.

And that is a whistlestop tour of the DSA API programme, and I will now
address the various questions I saw that have come through in the chats
and. Yep, feel free to keep putting them in.

### Questions

So, "Why do we need another Slack channel? Why not start groups in the
existing cross-government channels?" We have been talking about that a
lot. And the answer is, as with all of this stuff, it's an experiment.
We think we need a bit of room to spread out. We think we would like to
have channels for each panel, sorry, for each session at these workshops
for instance, so that the conversations we have here can keep going
after the workshop’s over. It may not work out, I think we should be
very honest about that from the beginning. You know, it's an experiment
that we came up with two weeks ago, and I'll give it a go. But, you
know, we feel like to have an ongoing conversation and to get into niche
stuff, it makes more sense to have our own instance, so that we can
split up. So, we will also cross-post to the APIs channels on
cross-government Slack and the local Gov Digital, which are pretty low
traffic at the moment and we're going to try and see what we can do
about that.

"Where can we access these documents?" So as I said, the data standards
catalogue, which is going to be the kind of front end for the DSA and
for this work, is going to be on the alpha Gov platform. It's not there
yet because it's still a private repo while we test it. But as I say I
will send out invitations and links in the next week or so.

Rosalie's put the API guidance question in there, thanks Rosalie. I will
copy that over to the Slack channel as well.

"Strong and stable." Yes.

Adam asked an excellent question which is gonna, which is gonna make me
run out of time but "As a steering hand for APIs in government, how do
you think about checks and balances to ensure different government
bodies don't try and create APIs for the same thing?" I mean, this is
the entire rationale around the API catalogue. What we hope is that if
you're thinking of creating an API, you start with the API catalogue and
see if there is, if there's one there that does what you'd like, you
know, what you're trying to do, so that you can reuse that rather than
recreate, creating your own. We appreciate that doesn't always happen,
but I mean there is, we have a limited mandate in the sense that we
can't stop people doing it.

What we can do is encourage people to, through groups like this and
through engagement departments, we encourage, we can encourage a kind of
publication process or workflow for this so that an early stage is, have
you, as a product team, have you checked the API catalogue? Is there an
API that does what you're trying to do? And I think, you know, we've got
to, this is partly the thinking behind expanding this community and
expanding its reach and the regularity of these meetings is to get this
stuff out there.

"What does DSA stand for?" That's been answered \[Data Standards
Authority\], thank you.

"What sort of retention period will the Slack have?" It, at the moment,
it will be ephemeral. I mean, you can keep, I think Slack lets you keep
10,000 messages. I think we might take a while to get there. But it's,
if it gets, you know, I feel like, as with many things, if it takes off
I can make a pitch for the budget. And I think, so that, like everything
else, it’s experimental and if we make a success of it, it's likely to
have a better retention period.

From Rosalie, "You mentioned potentially removing technical detail from
the standards. What are some of the details you're thinking about and
why would you remove it?". I personally don't want to remove any
technical details and if anything I'd like to get deeper into it. This
is, my point there was more along the lines of what, how people respond
to it as one of the questions we would ask the community to consider.
So, is there, is there a case, for instance, for streamlining it so that
the technical details of each, you know, if you're talking about how you
do microservices or something like that, in the standards is, is held as
a, is linked to rather than held in the main body because people are
finding the technical details too hard. I'm not saying that's true and I
don't necessarily have the answers to this, but it's part of the
questions we want to ask the community and get them to get them to weigh
in on.

"Who knows what machinery the government will merge", fair point.

"Any plans for cross-government API user ID/authentication?" I mean,
that's very much above my paygrade. It's one of the things that we
thought about when we were thinking about the levels of the API
catalogue, is there a way that we could have a second, secure area of
this to, to allow people with more sensitive APIs a bit more peace of
mind. And then we thought about it so we didn't want to run, we weren't
in a position to run a cross-government ID/authentication platform. And
so we stepped back to looking at metadata models which allow us to
publish safely.

Now I read the question again I realise I'm answering the wrong thing
and this is "Any plans for cross-government API user ID and auth?" Not
at the moment. But wouldn't it be great. And I think that's the kind of
thing in the manage, that, that you could see the kind of reference
implementations moving towards. You know, if someone starts, if someone,
probably not us, probably one of the big departments, started to run an
authentication platform that could be used across government, I think
there'd be a lot of take up for that. And I know that some of the bigger
departments have got quite extensive ambitions for their API platforms,
so who knows? Not any plans in the DSA but maybe there are some things
bubbling.

**Sarah Johns**

Charles, there's another question from Oswald: "What do you mean by API
Management?"

**Charles Baird**

Yeah I skipped over that one because it was I realised I only got two
minutes left! But in this particular instance I think what we're talking
about is API gateways, API catalogues, internal platforms where your
APIs are held so that developers can find them. Well, internal or
external platforms. So we'd be talking about something like something
like one of the, the API Management tooling platforms like Kong or
Apogee or the Azure API platform manager, sorry, API manager, that is,
that will have various elements to it but maybe an API marketplace,
maybe an API gateway.

This is why it's going to be umbrella guidance because in terms of,
there is both that and there's also the kind of philosophy of how you
manage APIs and allow and make sure that people are publishing in the
right way that people are developing in the right way and that when you
have got, if you're in a large, large organisation with a lot of
developers, that that they are, they are standardising one platform. So
there's two elements, one of the, one of the philosophy of API
Management and one of the technical details. Jacqui answered the
question much better than I could. Which is to say that it's about full
lifecycle management of your API. \["API Management is about full
lifecycle management of your api; including managing it through
development, test and versioning in live; ensuring deprecated APIs are
replaced/removed"\] I couldn't agree more.

I think if, unless anyone else has got any more questions, that this
will unusually, end almost on time.

**Sarah Johns**

Yeah, there's no questions in the Slack channel at the moment.

**Charles Baird**

That feels like a personal dig, Sarah, but I'll let it, I'll let it go.

**Sarah Johns**

But, but lots of people have joined it so that's really positive.

**Charles Baird**

There you go. So, baby steps. Thanks everyone. And I think that...
"\[...APIs\] can be troublesome" that is a very good point. Let me
encourage you to come on to the slack and we can talk about it in more
detail. Thanks, everyone. I'm really, I'm really looking forward to the
next session. And look what's catching up with you later. Cheers.

## 2. Panel

### Introduction

**Sarah Johns**

Over to you. And if all the presenters can put their cameras on. They
should miraculously appeal, appear on your screen. Charles do you want
to turn your video off?

**Charles Baird**

I will. With pleasure.

**Tony Heap**

I quite like the idea of miraculously appealing, actually.

**Rosalie Marshall**

There's Jacqui, we've got Gair.

**Jacqui Leggetter**

Morning everyone.

**Rosalie Marshall**

We just, we just need Tony and Katie to appear. Oh, really? I can't see.
Oh, I guess I don't see everyone.

**Tony Heap**

It deliberately blanks out people if they're too handsome, so as not to
upset everyone else.

**Sarah Johns**

How do we do gallery view, that's a start. How do we make people... Yay,
first, first Teams challenge, how to make everyone appear on the screen
at the same time. I was kind of hoping one of those seamless you
disappear on the screen moments, obviously that's not gonna happen.
Carry on and I'll see if I can do something to help with that.

**Rosalie Marshall**

Okay. All right. So, hello everyone, and most of you who I don't know on
this call and there are lots of new names, I'm Rosalie Marshall, I am
currently leading on the technology strategy at the home office, which
funnily enough does actually have an API strategy component, but I did
focus on APIs previously for a number of years at GDS, we didn't have an
API programme then it was just me focused on this, in addition to other
stuff. And it culminated in me, writing, helping write the bid for the
Data Standards Authority. And this authority has now, you know, really
helped GDS stand up a team around APIs where, you know, Katie and
Charles have come on board and Charles has just told you all about the
API programme.

So, that's me. Onto the panel at hand. And just, just kind of at the
beginning just wanted to say, you know, this is a panel for everyone
here so please consider what this panel means for you, what do you want
to get out of it. So, please put your questions in the chat, or over on
the Slack channel which I need to open still, but I'll do that. And over
to the panellists. So we have a great number of panellists here, who
I've been speaking to for a number of years, and speaking to them about
the standards, about guidance, and many of them have presented to you, I
think all of them that have presented to you before at different API
community events.

So we've got, and I'll pass them, I'll pass over in just a sec for
everyone to introduce themselves. We've got Tony from HMRC, Katie,
sorry, Tony was at, he was at HMRC which is why I just made that
mistake. Katie from HMRC, Jacqui from DWP and Gair from DVLA. And I
think it's brilliant that we've got a diverse panel, and we're even
more, more balanced towards women this time, which is quite, quite
amazing because, yeah. It's actually always, it's always been quite
diverse this community, much more diverse than data has been. But
anyway, it's good to see an equal panel, and I will finish up there and
just pass over to the different panellists for their introductions. So,
Katie Can I come to you first.

**Katie Longstaff**

Yeah, so, um, previously I've been involved in the HMRC's API standards
and assurance. So, just looking at how APIs are built and getting
consistency around our external facing API status on our developer hub.
Now moving into delivery management with the API platform, and our
secure data exchange service but still be keeping a close eye on what's
going on in the API community, as I'll be, you know, involved in
delivering functionality on our API platform, as well. So that's me.

**Rosalie Marshall**

All right, thanks Katie Jacqui did you want to go next.

**Jacqui Leggetter**

Morning everyone so I'm Jacqui Leggetter, and I'm head of integration in
DWP. We've been building and evolving our API platform over the last
three years. So we've been on this journey quite a while and I would say
quite mature in this space, we've been working with Charles on the cross
government catalogue, and hopefully I'm going to talk to you today a
little bit about how our strategy is evolving and how APIs have really
become at the forefront of everything that we do in DWP now.

**Rosalie Marshall**

Thanks, Jacqui. Gair, I can see you, do you want to go next?

**Gair McAdie**

Yeah. Hi, Gair McAdie, I'm a Technical Architect at DVLA. I might have
misread the brief here 'cause I happen to have a brief summary of where
we are, I think we've also started on our API journey, about two three
years ago, where our data strategy, our data sharing strategy promoted a
sort of API first approach, and we implemented a vehicle inquiry API
which has become very popular.

So, yeah, just just, I have a slightly sore throat so I'm going to keep
it very brief but we've got now about around 1000 users on, registered
users for those API. And we've got about another dozen APIs we don't put
on our portal because they're for specific third parties that are not
for the public and not secure. So we get a few million requests on our
vehicle inquiry, it'll be about a billion today, since we went live, and
most of that was under private beta. And we also have about over 4000
users registered for our third party across secure and open channels. So
yeah, it's kind of taken off.

We have a quite small development squad for the platform for third party
sharing, so limited capacity so I've just got a couple of brief
screenshots to summarise what we've done. I also pulled out a couple of
the opportunities and challenges which I think a couple people have
mentioned, in that largely, that, like you say, the someone had
mentioned I think it was in the chat, that user authentication by third
parties has been a challenge. And yes, it’d be great to see some
consistency and commonality across government. And also, our developer
portal with a small development squad has been, we haven't delivered all
the features we'd like to do. And again, that's an ideal opportunity for
cross government working. So it's good to see that and the API catalogue
taking off.

We had our own challenges, I won't bore you with those, but again it's,
we've had to come up with a very secure two factor GPG 45 style
authentication, which has to be quite bespoke. But yes, I won't bore you
with that. Just a couple screenshots, one showing that our vehicle API
over the weekend, a couple of days, you know, a few billion requests and
an awful lot of people going beyond what we've allowed them to attempt
per second.

And, sorry, a brief screenshot of that portal, not a great screenshot,
it kind of highlights we haven't changed it much for a year or so, but
it has got a couple of our public APIs on there and it's, there's a lot
more features we'd like to add. I mean, obviously with so many users
start to use this now does help for all these support calls. Trying to
publish this so initially we're trying to share our specs via email
which is quite a joke. So, definite improvement, and these are just,
yeah we've had to build our own platform tool on service technology.
We've got an internal management UI which I've tried to do a
non-sensitive screenshot showing how many users we've got on there, but
we have to manage a lot of users through our API channel. And that was
it really, so yeah, thank you for inviting me.

**Rosalie Marshall**

Thanks, Gair. All right, that's great. Okay. Oh, I can see Tony now I
can see you Katie as well, and so should we, we'll pass over to Tony for
your intro.

**Tony Heap**

Hello everyone I'm Tony Heap. I'm the lead product owner for API
Management at NHS Digital. NHS digital has been publishing APIs for
quite a while, 15 years or more. There's always been an ecosystem with
Central National services and external if you like software that's
deployed in GP practices, and pharmacies and hospital trusts etc. So
APIs are nothing new to NHS digital, but our user research has shown
that people find it really hard to integrate with the National APIs.

So, our mission is just to make integration easier. So we're, as you
might expect, building an API platform delivering restful APIs, trying
to make it as self service as possible, improving our documentation. We
have not one API catalogue but about, well we did our four, we've now
got that down to three. And we're working to get it down to one. But you
know there's a lot of historic information that is spread all over the
place so one of our big jobs is to try and pull that all together in one
place. We've had a recent success in terms of our live APIs on the new
platform.

So, one of the key national systems is called the personal demographic
service that's the big central database that's got everybody's NHS
number in it. And, I don't know if anyone's heard in the news but
there's a programme of vaccinations going on at the minute for something
called COVID. In order to get a COVID vaccination, you need to have your
NHS number so every system that's involved in either booking or
administering vaccinations needs to be able to either look up someone's
details given their NHS number or look up their NHS number given their
details, do a search in a safe and secure way. That went live with the,
you know, the kind of national rollout of vaccines that went live last
week for the first time and it's now running at about 200,000
transactions per day. So that's that's our kind of first foray into live
use which we're very excited about and so far, touchwood, it's working
well. We've got 24 by - I'm boasting now, aren't I - 24 by seven
support, you know, it's all out of hours and stuff it's gotta be super
up. We're all feeling a little bit like we're contributing to the
national well being.

**Rosalie Marshall**

Thanks Tony, that's been really useful, all your introductions have
given us quite a broad overview of the work that you're involved in
currently. And I think it, we'll just turn to to each of you
individually, so we can talk about how we've been connected in the past
and how you've worked with the API community, before we move to some
broader questions, and and those questions will be a mix of of some I've
got down but also some from the chats, and those will be kind of more
just, you know, to all of you to pick up.

So, just starting out, someone's actually put in the chat "fantastic to
hear API is at the forefront of DWP strategy." That kind of gives me an
inroad into the first question I was going to ask Jacqui. Because,
Jacqui at the DWP you've had a lot of publicity over the work that
you're doing, and your API strategy has received a lot of recognition in
that. And I was just going to ask why you think this has been, and
particularly because I think you're the only director we've got on this
panel, and, and I'm just interested in what you think you've been able
to bring as a director of integration and and what's the benefit of
having a senior stakeholder in charge of API strategy.

**Jacqui Leggetter**

While I get off mute. Morning again everyone, so yeah, it's fair to say
we started our journey initially just thinking about APIs and if we
think about how we surface those APIs we were very much focused on our
internal API economy initially. So when we think about the number of
citizens that we support, we were sitting at around about 20 million at
any given time, and that has increased obviously exponentially last year
as a result of COVID. We've increased by three, four million citizens.
So, effectively our API strategy changed slightly for us to focus more
on the citizen journey and bring us more in line with putting the
outcome based, and debunking demything, what APIs are all about.

So historically, I mean APIs have been around a long time but
historically, they've been things that architects and engineers have
talked about. And what we started to do is demystify the use of APIs and
start talking about the services that they underpin and start thinking
about how APIs support that sharing of data, that sharing of
information, and therefore, leading to better outcomes for the citizen.
So, we talk about APIs linked to an outcome. And I think having a senior
sponsor, not only on my level but all the way up to director general
level, in the DWP, that understand the purpose of APIs, they can
understand what we use them for, and we've done a really big evangelism
exercise across the whole of DWP digital, particularly with our business
analysts, with our product owners and with our delivery managers because
if we identify the right APIs for reuse, we can accelerate delivery we
can accelerate our thinking and we can prove, and do early testing,
early learning, therefore, leading to quicker delivery.

So for us it was really a journey to get us to the point of
understanding what was it that blocked engineers and building solutions
from reusing what already existed, why every time we had a new policy
demand we would be looking at building a new service or a new solution
instead of looking at how can we leverage what we already have and
taking that even a step further to leverage some of the common
components. If we look across DWP and those 23 million citizens that we
support, this may be 25 different benefit lines across DWP. But in the
main there are some common processes in those benefit lines. First point
of contact, we need to validate the citizen as who they say they are.
That's a really common process, not surprisingly, and when we looked
across a number of our benefit lines, we all did it in different ways.
Some people did it by calling the citizen, and some did it by telephony,
and some asked for passports or documentation, etc.

But we looked at COVID caused as a response. We had in the first month
of COVID, despite the furlough scheme that was there and supported a lot
of people, we had 2 million people in the first month that lost their
jobs that came at DWP, and historically we would have done a face to
face interview with all of those people. But introducing an API into our
identity and trust API, and introducing that into the Universal Credit
journey, enabled us to automate the authentication of about 2.4 million
citizens that otherwise would have needed to be validated through a
phone call or documentation. So for us it's about thinking about all
those outcomes and how we surface those APIs and making them easy to
discover, easy to test against and easy to use.

So working with our engineering and architecture community thinking
about our platform, and our portal, we put a lot of effort into ensuring
we have a portal that's really rich, we've got, I think at the minute
we've got about 170 APIs in our portal. Given our strategy for common
reusable components, we're about to add another 50 odd into that over
the coming months. And the portal is a really nice human readable
format, a landing page that people can come and search to look for an
address, you can type in the word address, and any APIs that link to
address will pop up so that you can see it. You'll not only just see
that on a nice landing page, you're able to see who owns the API, you're
able to see the types of processes that it underpins, and most
importantly, you're able to see the API contract, and that's the key to
this. The contract is written in a human readable format so anybody can
read that contract, and you can see the data, you can see the
information that is sent on the request, and you can see the response
that comes back on it, yeah.

So straight away you can say, I need three of those five data items
therefore this API will meet my need, or you may find five of the six
data items that you need, therefore you can ask the person who owns it
if they can add a new feature, or you can find another API that has
that. So, these are business analysts and product people and delivery
managers that are having these conversations. An engineer doesn't come
near that until we've agreed “What does the thing look like that we want
to build?” So driving it from that strategy and that outcome perspective
really helps us shape the API, shape the service first, before we
actually start to build it. So when we come to building it we've already
agreed the contract first, the two sides of the interface will have
spoken to each other about what they're using it for and they'll have
done all of the GDPR compliance and making sure that that person is
authorised to use the data. We'll have our data standards in place so
the APIs will all be built with common data standards and the data
dictionary and data standards are really key in a good API economy
because having those, if you type first line of address, the first line
of address is the same for everybody, or a surname is the same surname
for everybody, forename, middle name, we're using the same terminology.
Same metadata, same data label items, which makes it much simpler.

So we've evolved that into our next way of thinking is looking at how we
use APIs internally. We've also shared a lot of those APIs externally,
particularly in cross government service journeys. So we surface a
single API normally out to other government departments, but we may have
layered it under the hood. So we may surface a single API to the NHS. We
have, DWP pay a number of qualifying benefits for other government
departments, so NHS free prescriptions, there's the Help to Save scheme
in HMRC, free school meals, blue badge, road tax exemption, those kind
of things. And we can expose a single API for other governments to call.
Those APIs will be in the register, and that's what we've been working
with Charles on, to make sure that those APIs are available in the
register and for other governments, other government departments to
find.

We can discover and test and reuse, and we layer our APIs underneath
that, so we expose a single API to the other government department, and
we'll call our services to trace the account using a name, address, date
of birth, a national insurance number - we don't use an NHS number but
we have other matching criteria that we can match a citizen - find the
record, and then give the information. We use the APIs to try not to
send loads of data, we try and send a yes or no answer to the question
that, does this person qualify for free prescriptions at the point the
pharmacist dispenses the prescription. We landed an API last year that
enables the pharmacist now, when they record it, to do a check real time
to see if the citizen's entitled, and the powerful, powerful impact of
having that real time API for the NHS is obviously loads of error, loads
of fraud in the free prescriptions space. Saves the NHS when it's fully
rolled out over 200 million a year and that's the power of sharing data
across government real time.

So feeding that into our strategy, we're trying to look now at holistic
citizen journeys. So at the minute we've done an awful lot of
transformation around if somebody is a pensioner or if somebody is a
disabled person, or in a Universal Credit space. We're trying to now
think about a holistic citizen journeys and when we think about our
citizen, I may be a person who has become unemployed, I may be a single
parent, and I may have a disabled child. And currently, that person
would interact with DWP through three different product lines, and our
new strategy is know for that person to interact with us once, through
the yougov webpage, and when they come in through yougov they'll be
presented with a series of screens that enable them to self serve, and
they'll be interacting with APIs at the backend that will be taking some
of their scenario, some of that information, validating they are who
they say they are, and almost processing what their needs at that point
in time. So if we need for example to see a birth certificate of a
child, we can ask the citizen there and then "We need to validate the
birth of your child, can you upload the birth certificate." So real time
API is our strategy for that holistic citizen.

And I think that's why we're getting a lot of interest externally now,
Rosalie, because we're very public about our intent in seeing our
citizen as a holistic person has complex needs. They don't want to be
interacting with three or four different journeys, they want to interact
with one journey. It's like us going to the bank and being told "I only
deal with your bank account, you need to talk to someone different about
your mortgage or someone different about your credit card", and it's
providing that holistic view for the citizen and that holistic service
for the citizen. And to do that, our APIs will become much more powerful
not only internal but externally, calling, creating that economy, that
API economy cross government, so that we can do that real time
interaction.

That's been driven strategically, that is our application reference
architecture, and that is being adopted now and feeding and helping to
shape our business strategy where we can move our operation staff out of
processing silos into more holistic journey. So if you're at the, in a
contact centre, or you're in, supporting citizens who come to us for
help, you can support the holistic needs because the APIs under the hood
are doing that complex work for you, you're not jumping in and out of
different systems. So I think that's what's really helped having senior
stakeholder and shaping that strategy mostly. Sorry that was a really
long answer I'm just talking you through our strategy.

**Rosalie Marshall**

All right, thanks Jacqui. Yeah. Yeah, a full look into your strategy
there. So, there are a number of questions coming up in the, in the
chat, but I will wait and hold on those while we do, while we just turn
to other members of the panel. You mentioned there about, you know,
building APIs that are easy to discover, discover - sorry, not talking,
trying to talk too fast - and easy to use. And it just kind of brought
my attention to some of the work that Tony led, so we'll turn to you
next Tony, with, with great input from Katie as well, but around how to
make APIs, ensure APIs meet user needs. So, how to deliver APIs as
services, as it were, so if we could just turn to you, Tony to, and
that, sorry that guidance was published just before I left the Data
Standards Authority, so it's now up online and you can all go and view
it now, but just was wondering Tony, if you could talk us through why
you put so much time into that, and, you know, why you saw it as so
essential to get published.

**Tony Heap**

Thanks Rosalie. So, as mentioned before, I was at NHS digital, spent
some time with with Katie and others at HMRC as well, and there, and
then NHS digital as well, we did a lot of work to help API producer
teams build good APIs. So we did work around you know what governance
points should there be in the process. How do we make sure they're kind
of doing all the right things that we, we think, build good APIs, and
we've been doing a lot of user research with external developers to find
out you know what what they needed out of an API, as well. Because we
had, GDS, in, savvy people within the teams, we kind of, you know, we
looked towards GDS and we saw some really good practices around user
testing, user research, the whole thing about discovery, GDSS, alpha and
beta phases designed for digital services, which resonates nicely with
APIs as well, we had, you know, we already had the concept of APIs being
in an alpha or in a, in a beta status, I think initially beta, we later
introduced alpha as well.

So, and then conversely, you know, over, over my career I've seen some
anti patterns as well I've seen teams build APIs without really thinking
about the user need without really thinking about the developer need,
and building APIs that haven't been that good and haven't been that well
used, you know, perhaps because there wasn't actually a user need there.
Or perhaps because there was a user need there but it's just the API is
either not documented well or it's too hard to use etc. So those two
things together really and, you know, taking inspiration from GDS,
sorry, I suppose another thing as well is that people, people would talk
about the GDS process and they talk about you know services and they go
well yeah but that doesn't apply to APIs does it APIs are just tech.
They're not services. Now, you know, that then sort of gives API teams
permission to not bother doing any of the good things that we say we
should do for services. And that just didn't seem right to me and to
other people as well. So we said well look, we, you know, user research
is important, user testing is important, discovery's important.

So all those things that the GDS say should do for an online digital
service, they apply equally well to APIs, perhaps with a little bit of a
twist because, you know, instead of citizens being your end users,
you've got software developers as your primary end users of your API.
And then they've got their end users, be they citizens or tax advisers
or healthcare professionals or whoever. So let's take this GDS guidance
and let's first of all try and validate the idea that it's a relevant
thing to do for APIs and, and then let's try and, you know, explain how
you would do it for APIs as well within that GDS framework. So we did,
we did some of that at HMRC, you know, we defined phases alpha beta. We
may have had a discovery phase, I can't remember if we had a discovery
phase at HMRC, but we certainly introduced that at NHSD, and we have a
checklist as well for API producer teams to work through.

So, we have a bunch of governance points, so, you know, kickoff, you
know, so the kickoff is like, right here's the process, make sure you
follow the process, because it's going to help. And then, at end of
discovery let's have a checkpoint, a bit like a GDS review but an
internal thing, end of alpha, end of beta, etc. And really, we could
almost be cardboard cutouts at those reviews because the checklist is
the thing that kind of forces the people to look at the good things they
should be doing, and to do them. And whenever we have one of these
reviews, we will always iterate, it's not, this is not intended to be a
piece of bureaucracy for you. This is intended to be a value add, so as
we go through the checklist I always make sure I ask that question, is,
was this process helpful, and more often than not, in fact exclusively
I'm gonna say, they've said you know what the checklist was super
helpful because, you know, it just helped us structure our development,
it covers the things we need to do to make sure we're, you know, we're
delivering a good API, and it's all been been pretty positive I think.

We had that session, community session, what, it must be like six months
ago now, where we canvassed opinion from the API community as well. Some
of you might have been on it to see whether people were bought into this
idea as well, and we got pretty unanimous support back from that, from
what I remember too. So, so it doesn't seem to be that contentious a
thing. It's certainly working well for us at NHS digital.

**Rosalie Marshall**

Thanks Tony yeah that session was, I think, the beginning of last year,
wasn't it? As soon as we, as soon as the lockdown started, and we had to
move it all online. And, yeah, and here we are again.

So you actually just kind of mentioned some points that feed in really
well to some of the work that I was involved with when working with HMRC
and Katie, and that was around HMRC assurance process, and there's been
so much interest around this from the API community, I'm constantly, you
know, forwarding people to you, Katie, to talk about how to do assurance
and assessment for APIs, and I even wrote a long 14 page case study to
try and get all the details of how it worked, which I think is still
kind of being shared around GDS but hasn't gone any further. But it
would be really interesting to hear from you about, you know, why do you
think there's been so much interest in this process that you've got at
HMRC and just to hear a bit more about it.

### API Management Platforms - Build or Buy?

Katie Longstaff

So, yeah, I mean that the process you mentioned, we were working on
since right at the beginning of our journey when we released our
strategy back in 2015, and our first API onto our platform back in 2016.
And I guess the reason why it all came about was because initially when
we set up our API platform and gateway we were looking at building APIs
basically by the same team that were building the infrastructure. And we
realised that that wasn't actually going to work with the volume of APIs
that we were going to be building, and also maintaining the platform,
that we needed to have a federated model.

So we have various delivery centres around the country, and because the
people building the APIs weren’t gonna closely in touch with the people
that actually own the platform, we thought that, you know, we needed
some kind of assurance process, and to ensure that we were having
consistent APIs that were being delivered and published out externally,
because if you've got different software developers picking them up,
different accountancy firms and things using them, we want to ensure
that if they pick up an API for self assessment then, you know, that's a
consistent design to an API for VAT, or customs, and, you know, we don't
really want people to be using APIs and then having to, you know,
constantly read documentation and figure out how HMRC works. We want
them, you know, to be able to pick up any API and be able to run with
it.

So yeah, it was just all around getting that consistency in place and
making sure that we're using patterns, you know, set patterns and things
are working the right way. There are some place, times when that is
challenging, and that is when the delivery - sorry, I've got my son sat
at the side of me, I'm getting a bit distracted while he's trying to do
his schoolwork. There are times when it does become challenging,
because, you know, you you've got projects or programmes that only want
an API to be built to meet their needs and requirements, or if you're
doing a government data share where, you know, a particular government
department needs data a certain way and that doesn't align with the way
you're wanting to build your API. So, there, you know, there can be
challenging times where you need to, you know, discuss patterns and
discuss how things are built, and, you know, that may mean that you do
sometimes have to build an API that is for a specific purpose and then
won't be reusable. You know, that's something that you have to weigh up
when building your APIs and getting those APIs out there.

So if I just, if we just have a look, I did pop, I have got some slides
decks, slides from , you know, previous presentations that I've done and
I just wanted to quickly just show that when I'm running through the
steps that we have in place because it might just make it easier for
people to sort of visualise. So you should be able to see that now. Can
you see the screen?

Audience

Yeah. Yep. Yeah.

Katie Longstaff

Cool. So we'd call this our technical review acceptance process and what
we put in place was a set number of things that people need to complete
in order to get their API out there into live so we have a welcome call,
a product brief, a design clinic, and then we have, you know, various
assessments on the way through. So when we do this welcome call, we, you
know, introduce the API platform. People may not have built an API on
our platform before, they may have built them for other internal
platforms on HMRC or they may have been building web services before. So
we have a document that we put together to give them hints and tips and
best practices around how to use our various environments, our pre prod
environments that we've got built, to prove their APIs before they
actually deploy them out into public consumption.

We'll then hold a product brief meeting with them which is basically
where we want to understand about their API. So what is it they're
building, what is it they're trying to deliver, what are the user needs,
how does this API work on our platform, do we need to build new
functionality to support it, are they using something like, say, for
example, notifications, sending out notifications to customers, should
that become a common component on the API platform, rather than
something that a particular team would build and then wouldn't be
reusable. So we hold this meeting, just to, you know, understand what
that API is for and how we can help them and how it's going to sit on
the platform.

Once we've had those discussions the teams can go away and start
building their API. And obviously we promote user research while they're
building their API. Once they've got that into our dev and QA
environments, and they've deployed it to the platform and done some
testing themselves, we'll then hold a design clinic with them.

So the design clinic is where we get more technical and we'll look at
the architecture and that design and the patterns that they're using.
And we look at whether they're meeting our API principles that we have
at HMRC as well. So, not breaking clients' software, through functional
evolution, use of, reusable where suitable, they're lead by research,
they're consistently designed, and they must perform, so, you know, we
don't want to put an API out there that's gonna fall over, you know,
whenever they get some high volume of usage. So we have this with our
architects and tech leads and they will just have a look at the API,
they'll have a look at the documentation, how the JSON responses are
structured and whatever responses we're throwing back and things like
that. And just ensure that, you know, they're not doing anything out of
the ordinary. And if they are we will give advice on how they can change
that, and things they can do to make it better and align more to our
standards on the platform and how we work.

So then after that point they'll move into these external test and
production. So we have, as Tony mentioned earlier, we brought in alpha,
we've got beta in external tests, and then when they move into
production, it's beta and then stable.

So the reason why we don't have alpha in production is because alpha is
just documentation only, there are no endpoints for them to hit, so, you
know, it's pointless pointing something to production where they can't
use it. So we'll do the alpha version in our test environment only. It's
a good opportunity to get feedback on the API, how it's looking, what
the responses are, and it can help in user research for when the API
goes into a testable state when they can hit those test endpoints. So by
having these things in place it just means that, you know, as I said, we
get that consistency and we know that the APIs that we put out there
work before they get to that testing, and they are consistent.

So I think that's why people tend to want to ask questions and
understand what we do, because when you're starting off for the first
time, you know, getting an API gateway or platform up and running, and,
you know, looking at building numerous APIs, you know, how do you manage
that and how do you ensure that they're all built to a certain standard.
Obviously there's teething issues and it takes a lot of work to get
something in place, but I think for us in HMRC, it's been good to
actually, you know, see these APIs be built, be put out there and be
used by, you know, various consumers, and other government departments,
internal HMRC systems where they need to go out over the web and come
back in again. So yeah, it's, I think it helps people understand how to
get APIs built when you're working on a federated model, like we are.

**Rosalie Marshall**

Thanks Katie my connection just cut out for a second so I'm hoping I'm
going to be okay for the rest of the panel. Yeah, that was that was a
good overview of your process that you've got down, and there's quite a
few comments that are happening in the chat around API management so
we'll explore that topic in a bit and I know it's an event that Charles
and Sarah,are planning on running as well.

So, some very different answers there from Gair, and Jacqui on how they
have managed their APIs and the platforms that they have stood up, but
we will come to that in a second. I just want to turn to you Gair, and I
know you've got a sore throat so you don't want to talk for too long,
but if you could just give us, so, something that we worked on together,
Gair, was the domain for APIs, the gov.uk domain. And this was, again,
it was largely led by you, and you helped us get that going, which other
departments are now using and, hopefully, it should help us collate APIs
across government more effectively if we need to in the future. But just
wondering from your point of view, what do you think, why do you think
it's important for departments to use a single API domain? What have the
benefits been to you at DVLA?

**Gair McAdie**

Yeah, thanks, Rosalie. Yeah, I guess the domain names for APIs, you
know, kind of similar to websites in that they need to be simple and
intuitive, and equally, we need to, we all need to be really publishing
underneath GOV.UK wherever possible, just for common branding and trust.
You know, and that goes for certificate management as well, the
certificate chain. So, you know, I think there were, there were existing
domains underneath GOV.UK for services, for public-facing citizen
services, and there's a data.gov.uk but that's more for public inquiries
and so hence why we tend to agree with GDS’s going forward with
api.gov.uk for APIs, there wasn't a suitable domain. So that's why we
ended up with that.

But underneath there, I think, I mean there is existing GDS guidance on
domain names. Departments are going to need to request them from you
anyway. I'll just share them, they're quite brief. Just after what
Charles was saying, these may be changing, but I think they make sense,
what's there. And there's a set of guidance there which is largely
similar to websites. You know, you should avoid policy schemes,
organisation, temporary names, I mean it is a pain for our clients to
have to change URLs. It's not just URLs, it's certificate management.
They need to be static, stable. So we avoided using DVLA in our domain
names.

We use DVLA. gov.uk for more internal things. So we ended up with a
driving, a more generic driving licence domain. And then the difference
underneath there, the reason why we haven't gone with the standard API
name service, api.gov.uk, is that APIs are sort of structured
differently than websites, so websites tend to offer coarse grained
services to citizens, whereas our APIs in particular, I guess, are made
up of a number of slightly finer grained services, some common services,
most of which, some of which are common to DVLA, particularly, you know,
authentication and credential management, but also we may have address
lookups, payments other common things that aren't service specific, the
structure's slightly different, so hence, and so initially we decided to
put them all underneath a single domain, I mean that approach, you know,
because I think in industry there's a mix of big companies, you know,
the Googles, Microsofts, Facebooks, Twitters and all the rest, have got
a very, you know, very consistently inconsistent approach to domain
naming but obviously that single domain is not something that's a, an
operational concern for these big organisations.

So we initially started out as a driving vehicle licencing api.gov.uk
for all our APIs, external ones. And that would have been fine. it's
just actually technical reasons since then, we found that our corporate
WAF device doesn't play nice with APIs, and we've had some real
struggles with that. So we are now, breaking out from our common APIs
into more service specific domain names for blast radius concerns. So I
think if it weren't for that we may have stuck with a single domain. So,
so, and we've had a lot of issues with our clients, you know, whereas
websites, people have a browser and that's largely easy to maintain,
keep up to date. Some of our third parties have very ancient, arcane IT
departments and infrastructure, and boundary firewalls and devices that
don't play nice with, you know, even with one way certificate exchanges
so, you know, we're trying, going to try and keep it simple. So this is
kind of one reason why you might want to stick to a single domain, or
why I think, as is suggested in the current guidelines, that you
actually use a more wide, public facing, consumer facing service name
API.gov.uk. So either way, it's not black and white.

**Rosalie Marshall**

Thanks, Thanks Gair, and yeah it's well worth letting everyone know that
this guidance that Gair just shared will, is likely to be updated soon.
At least, I was in the process of trying to update it before I left GDS
and I believe that has now, is now being handled. The main issue with
the guidance is currently our instructions around API developer portals,
and what standards we offer in that area, and I think that's where the
complexity around API domains can, really comes in is how do you, you
know, what, how do you manage your API documentation, and where, how do
you, you know, how do you host everything together and how does it all
link together. And that's a, an issue I know a number of departments are
struggling with at the moment so I believe GDS are kind of tightening up
their guidance in that area.

Something that, and, you know, we've got loads of good questions I know
that we've kind of shared as a panel that we want to talk through but
also questions are coming in on the chat too, so, hoping to turn to some
of those. One question is, and I think we'll go to that first, from
Mashuk, so "How do you build your own portal or use something off the
shelf?" and we have a number of answers in the chat already, one from
Gair, one from Jacqui, and both of them have gone down different routes.

So Gair's gone down build and Jacqui has gone down the buy route, and
they've kind of briefly explained why they've done that. If we could
actually turn to, I guess, Katie and Tony then, about how they've
approached this. So just interested in your API management, and what
you've done there. And I know, Katie, HMRC has been involved in the new
API Management guidance that we're trying to put together around this.
Did you want to just talk us through how you're managing things, Katie,
or have you you homeschooling in this present second? Oh, she's on mute.
Tony should we come to you?

**Katie Longstaff**

I was trying to, sorry, I was trying to come off mute and my keyboard
kept double clicking, and then I've got my son tapping me on the
shoulder, so I'll give it, I'll try and answer the best I can! So, yeah
so within HMRC we went down the build route. And so we have various
components but initially when we build our API platform was with one
supplier, and over time as the API platform developed and the software,
the product that we were using and wasn't kind of keeping up with pace
of where we were were going, we were, kept having to build security
patches, and, you know, patch things in in order to make it work, and we
were constantly trying to get to, we were constantly trying to get up to
the latest version that was available, and Tony'll be aware of some of
this, I think he was there when we were having some issues, but
basically our support contract ran out, so we were no longer under
support from this supplier.

So we made the decision to actually move our gateway and transition on
to another one. All this was done while we were, you know, up and live
so we had to transition all the APIs and everything across seamlessly
without anybody actually knowing. There was no downtime on the platform,
there was no issues for our end users.

So yeah basically we chose to build our own, but we also have to be
mindful that, learn from your mistakes in the past and to choose a
product or, well, not a product, but choose something that you can
actually develop and, you know, sort of mould to your own requirements.
And make sure you don't get stuck on something that you can't actually,
you know, use to the full ability that you need to. So yeah, we learned
that we needed to move on to something that was more stable for us, had
more capacity, and you know just worked the way we needed it to. So,
although building your own has its pros, it also has its cons as well.
But yeah, we're more on the build side than the buy side.

**Rosalie Marshall**

Thanks Katie. Tony, what are you doing over at the NHS?

**Tony Heap**

So we've started with buy. So it was really interesting because you
know, the experience at HMRC, I could see we'd built a really good
product, it had taken quite a few years to get it to where it was. When
I joined NHS digital there was quite an impetus to do stuff quickly, and
there was also a, you know, we, they were happy to throw a bit of money
at the problem. In fact, it was almost, sort of a given that we were
going to buy and have something particularly shiny, so we looked right
in the top quadrant of the Gartner Magic, what's it called, Magic
Roundabout, no, Magic Quadrant thing. So we looked at products like
Apigee Mulesoft. There was more, sort of, political keenness to go with
a fully fledged API Management product than a kind of commodity proxy
product such as AWS or Azure.

So we ended up choosing Google Apigee, and I'm glad we did. I think it's
easy to look at it and go "Oh, it's just a proxy", you know, how, you
know what developers like, "How big a job could that be?", but it's all
the Admin Tools and consoles that sit around it and the developer hub as
well. So, that stuff all came out of the box, admittedly not in the look
and feel that we would like exactly for the developer hub. So we're now
in the process of kind of re-skinning, or rebuilding some of our
developer-facing front ends to be more on-brand and more customised to
exactly what we want. But we were at least able to get an MVP live up
and running with live APIs pretty quickly, you know, we've got something
up within a matter of months, and we're now iterating on that, and we're
kind of 15 months in. So whether we will continue long term with Apigee,
you know, we'll have to see. Obviously, it's got costs associated with
it, and we may get to a point where we've built that much stuff around
it that it makes sense to think about switching out for something
cheaper, but at the minute it's doing a good job, it's not ridiculously
expensive.

**Rosalie Marshall**

All right, thanks Tony. So if there was one thing to bear in mind when,
let's do buying first, when buying an API management platform. Like,
what would it be then, Jacqui and Tony, that have gone down that route?

**Tony Heap**

Who first?

**Rosalie Marshall**

Either, either of you. You can go.

**Tony Heap**

I'll go. No, I'll go, I'm just trying to think of an answer now. I was
really, the evaluation was really tricky because basically, you know,
all the sales material for all the API platforms will say "Yeah, we'll
do, it does everything, it supports RAML, it supports OAS, it supports
this and that" It's only really when you get into the weeds that you,
you know, you discover whether it meets your needs or not. So, I would
say, a) don't spend too long choosing a tool, and b) plan to reevaluate
the tool after a period. So, that's what we've always said, it's, you
know, it's a decision for now but not forever.

**Rosalie Marshall**

Thanks Tony, yeah that's a good succinct summary. Jacqui, what would you
say, the one thing, the top thing to bear in mind, or what you, what you
bore in mind when going down that buy decision?

**Jacqui Leggetter**

I think the key for me is don't lock in. Just about similar to what Tony
said, don't lock into it, and make sure that if you decide, to review.
Because the marketplace does change, in fact we have just recently
changed after two years, and we've moved the product really seamlessly
because our non locking approach, and using a proxy, rather than putting
all your code into a platform, works much better. So keeping your
options open. Don't lock into anything for the long term. Do a proof of
concept if you can, and explore that the product is right for you
against your set of requirements. But for me it's really that just, the
not locking in and keeping it as open source as possible.

**Rosalie Marshall**

That's a good point around the open source too, thanks Jacqui, Okay, and
someone has put in chat "Would it be possible to name the product that
didn't work?" So, not sure, I'll leave that up to panellists to decide
whether to answer that in the chat. Gair, and Katie, you both built
solutions to API Management - if there was one thing to bear in mind
when doing that, or that you bore in mind when when building yours, what
would it be? I can't make eye contact with anyone to actually shift the
focus! So I'll have to say names, why don't we start with you, Gair?

**Gair McAdie**

Yeah, I just thought I'd try and type it rather than speak it, but yeah,
I think we did an evaluation as well a few years ago. I think we're kind
of at a crossroads again. There's a lot of features we want to build
into our developer portal. We only have a small development squad. But
yeah, as Katie was saying our requirements are sometimes quite bespoke,
and they weren't obvious fits back then. It may be that those tools have
matured a little, but from what we've seen I think it's similar to their
experience in HMRC.

It looks like we may be sticking with bespoke. I mean it is also that
point I've just tried to make that, you know the scale of cloud and
servers as well, there's things that means that proprietary tools cannot
compete. And also that makes them that much more attainable, I mean
knocking up some of the, sorry I sounded like a cowboy there didn't I?
Producing some of the tooling we've had to produce, I mean internally
obviously things can be done without all the, to look as shiny, but
there is quite a lot of tooling around it. So as Tony says, you know, if
you want to build something quickly, and you don't have a large team
then maybe you don't have a lot of choice. But we were able to knock up
the, there's a number of things around the API catalogue, the discovery
documentation as well as, you know, onboarding. Access management was a
big thing. And a whole lifecycle tooling around that, internally as well
as externally, is a surprisingly large undertaking.

But yeah, I've no regrets doing it in a bespoke way and actually the
skills we've built along the way, particularly around service, I mean
the kind of thing that they can do for us with next to no efforts, we
have APIs that require over 1000 requests a second, and things like
service technology would scale with so little effort. You know, we've
actually broken our test tools, rather than the actual underlying
technology stack.

**Rosalie Marshall**

Thanks Gair. Yeah, good, good overview. Katie, wondering for you what
would, what was the top thing that you bore in mind?

**Katie Longstaff**

Yeah, I think I'm probably gonna come from it from sort of a different
perspective. So, rather than focusing on, you know, the infrastructure
behind the platform and the gateway, I guess for us, what I'd say to
people is we had, we built our own external facing developer hub. So
because it's a public facing website, we went through a GDS assessment.
So what I would say is, you know, if you're building your own things
and, you know, we built this ourselves, I guess you can kind of look at
it like our first version of an API catalogue, but because we were
building that ourselves and, you know, trying to make it fit our user
needs, also bear in mind that, because it is external and publicly
facing then there are those GDS standards and those assessments that you
need to go through.

So, you know, when you buy a package, you know, I'm not sure how much
you can tweak that, or whether you're, whether people are exposing them
externally to the public like we do, but we had to bear in mind that we
had these assessments to pass, so ensure you're using GDS standard, GDS
patterns and, you know, don't just build something bespoke for your set
of users, just make sure you build something good, that meets those
standards as well.

### API Skills

**Rosalie Marshall**

Thanks Katie. Okay, so we are now an hour into the panel. So I believe
we've got another half an hour to go. So, yeah, if anyone's, you know,
feeling thirsty, we can stop for a minute, but if everyone's keen to
keep going, we'll just do that unless I hear from the panellists
otherwise. Gair, I hope your voice is holding up. So we've got a
question in the chat around streaming APIs, and let's come to that in a
sec.

So, I think it would be useful at this point to talk about, you know,
we've been talking about, you know, Gair mentioned skills that were
involved in using, in building the APIs over at DVLA, and obviously I
guess the different approaches you take to API management will affect
the, the API skills you have in your team. Likewise, you know, when we
come to talking about streaming in a second, probably a separate, you
know, set of skills needed there.

Interested in the subject of API skills and something that I've
discussed with members of the panel, particularly Tony, is around, like,
lack of tech author skills in the API community or in API development.
Just wondering if we could hear from you all on the panel about skills,
you know, what skills are we lacking in government API development at
the moment? What kind of challenges is that throwing up for you all?
Should we come to you, Tony first, since you raised this?

**Tony Heap**

Yeah, so let's talk about tech authors first. That just continues to be
a challenge for us, I think. It was a struggle at HMRC to find good
people, it's a struggle at NHS Digital as well. Good people do exist but
they seem to be few and far between. So if you go out for a content
designer, for example, you'll get someone who's really good at writing
citizen facing content but, you know, not technical enough to write API
specs. If you go out for a tech author, we've had some real mixed
experiences, so some of them might be good at Tech docs but don't
understand agile and don't understand, you know, GDS simple writing
guidelines. And so, you know, we'd have problems, integrating them into
an agile squad for example, you've got the idea of incremental delivery
and they would rather sit in a corner for weeks and weeks polishing a
thing, rather than collaborating and working together on it. So it
continues to be a problem, and I don't necessarily have a good answer
for it.

The other challenge I suppose with tech authors, as Katie mentioned, and
it's same NHS digital, we have a federated model for building APIs, so
we have API producer teams and then we have a central platform team. So,
we tend to advise API producer teams, look, you need someone who can
write your documentation on your team, but that's not always easy for
them to find, and if we just leave it to them, then we end up with
inconsistent standard of documentation, so we're kind of toying with the
idea that actually we have central tech author resources that we loan
out to the teams and/or are able to quality consistently review API
specs. So we've recently introduced a governance point in our process
which says have an API documentation review done, and that's our way of
trying to improve consistency. But, you know, finding someone who's good
at Tech writing, and also gets the tech just seems to be really hard.

**Rosalie Marshall**

It's interesting that you said that about having a central hub of tech
writers, because some of you will know I used to manage the tech writing
community at GDS, and that was the way we operated at GDS, it was
having, and tech writers actually, when GDS transformed away from having
a community model of management to more of a programme model of
management, technical writers along with technical architects, were one
of the only communities that remained a community managed model. And
that was because they had to kind of dip in and out of projects and
really needed a very strong core central team to, also because they're a
relatively new community within government. Like, I couldn't find
another tech writer when I first started at GDS in 2014. There weren't
any around and I was reaching out to Service Group saying, you know, "Is
anyone a tech writer? What are we doing? Where are the standards?" So,
yes, that's interesting about having that centrally managed model.

Other skills and, you know, or, does anyone else on the panel share that
pain of having troubles recruiting technical writers or are there other
skills that you are finding difficult to recruit? This is open to
anyone, just jump in.

**Jacqui Leggetter**

Yeah, so we've had, we've had the same challenge in bringing in
technical writers and writing the API in human readable formats and
writing content that people can actually, the whole point of the portal
is to make things discoverable. If you don't understand what you're
reading on there, it's of limited use. So we have, we have brought in
some external tech writers to come in and write, rewrite the 150 APIs
that we had in our portal. Yeah. So we took an approach of, we'll get
these written in a really good way, so there've been, the APIs were
there, we didn't change the live service, this was about the write-up
and the presentation of the APIs for people. So we got the tech writers
to come in and rewrite them and we've created a series of templates
that, because we work on the federated model as well.

So we've not changed contracts, we've not changed the content of the
API, we've just changed how we write it up, how we describe it, and
we've created standards. And we're now in the process, we've got a small
team of, consisting of engineers and content writers that are writing
what we call the engineering playbook. And the engineering playbook will
define, not only the engineering best practices but also how to write
and how to approach a good API. So, for every engineer that comes into
the department they'll be given access to the playbook and they'll be
able to read that, and there'll be loads of templates that will help
them write the APIs. And then we've got the central team that own the
platform that will have a content writer to review and reflect and help,
so a bit similar to Tony's approach not writing everything, but doing
the review and making sure that it's of the right standard before it
gets uploaded into the portal, so that we've got that consistency, and
we present all of our APIs in a consistent way in a consistent format.

We also run the API, it was interested in seeing some of the things in
Katie's slide deck. We run API accelerator groups and again we talk to
people who are developing new APIs and we talk about standards and we
use standard contract templates, that sort of thing. And by using those
kind of things again we can build in standards, not only to the API
that's being built, but to the documentation that supports it. That's
the approach that we've taken, but it's taken us a long time to realise
that we needed all of that, Rosalie.

**Rosalie Marshall**

I wish the tech writing community was here to, was on this call. I've
noticed, I think we've got a couple of tech writers on the call. But
that's interesting that you're hiring. And there's mention in the chat
about taking approach to hiring, taking on graduates and training them
up, which is probably useful in that area of technical writing where,
you know, that, it's quite specific, actually, the work that they need
to do when it comes to documenting APIs for government. So, so that
might be an approach that people want to follow. Gair, Katie any
thoughts on skills that are, you're on mute, I think.

**Gair McAdie**

Oh, no I'm just moving my mouth without making any sound, I think. I
thought that was a really good point actually, it's just that, developer
portals and hubs are for developers, right? So actually we took the
approach that it's been engineers that largely documented APIs and API
specs. And that's been good and bad. I think when you supplement that
with API guidance, sometimes that's been written by engineers and is not
so well written material, the stuff that I've produced, I think. So
we've talked to service level managers and service designers, alongside,
and product owners, with engineers, but we're probably missing that
thing in the middle which is a technical writer, I'm not sure we have
any of those, to be honest.

**Tony Heap**

Gair, our tech authors commented that he thinks the best way to get a
good result is by pairing a developer with a tech author. So, the
developer that understands the thing and the tech author that can speak
in plain English.

**Gair McAdie**

Yeah.

**Rosalie Marshall**

At GDS we did Docs as Code, so that actually helped pair up tech writers
with developers, because they were working very closely using the tools
that developers used, but pair writing all the material Sorry I think I
caught you off there, Gair.

**Gair McAdie**

That's alright, I was just going to ask Jacqui, there was a question
earlier about the DWP portal. Is it available, public? Or is that, I
think you were talking about an internal one earlier.

**Jacqui Leggetter**

Yeah, so our portal at this point we're only making internal. We,
however, share the APIs that are available in the portal with the cross
government register, so all of the APIs that are in there are in the
cross government API register.

**Rosalie Marshall**

I've just seen Annie's given us a wave, she's a new technical writer at
GDS. Hi Annie.

**Tony Heap**

I want, there's one other thing I want to mention as well. So, user
research is also a slight pain area for us, I suppose. Similar with tech
authors versus content designers, if we recruit a user researcher,
sometimes we get ones that are really familiar with citizen facing
services and they've got all the right sort of soft skills to chat to
citizens. But, you know, we find that our audience of developers, is,
you know it's, it's not a, there's developers of all sorts, but they
tend to cluster, in a certain area of their personality space, let's
just say, and it's quite a specialised thing. So, not all user
researchers are good at kind of resonating with developers, I've been on
calls with user researchers and I'm just thinking, don't ask that,
that's the, you know, don't ask a developer that, or, I can't think of
an example right now, but, again, finding a user researcher who gets
tech well enough to know how best to interview a developer, but also
it's still important right because we're all developers on the team, or
most of us are, so we kind of think we know the user need already, and
it's easy to assume we don't need to do that user research, but I think
it's still important to do it because developers come in all shapes and
sizes.

**Rosalie Marshall**

Yeah. These were the types of conversations we were having when we were
putting the guidance together around how to ensure APIs meet user needs,
particularly, you know, how user research needs to be done a bit
differently for APIs than services, and different things to bear in
mind. And likewise, you know, having a tech writer rather than a content
designer based in your development team, and what kind of things that
they can do for a team as well.

Katie, we haven't heard from you yet on skills. Is there anything, and
if there's not then we can move on to the next question, but just
wondering from your point of view, is there anything that is difficult?
I guess you're kind of more on the assurance side than on the
development side itself.

**Katie Longstaff**

I guess yeah I mean I think we've kind of had the same issues as
everyone else. It mainly has been tech writers that we've, when we've
lost a tech writer, you know, it's taken time to, you know, recruit them
and get somebody else. But also I think as a general point it's
something that we are trying to get the balance right with HMRC, I
guess, is across the board with skills where, you know, a lot of the
resource is contractor-based and it's trying to, you know, convert those
skills into permanent staff. That is a real challenge.

So, you know, not necessarily just thinking of it from acquiring skills
as in just bringing someone into the team, but how would you actually
then transfer those skills into staff and make them permanent members of
staff so that you've not got that churn of contractors and trying to,
having to find new people to recruit, I guess that's a kind of different
take on it but it is still a challenge around skills.

### Streaming APIs

**Rosalie Marshall**

Okay. So that's been an interesting discussion around skills and like,
that, kind of, soft, I guess, soft issue of API development. And we
should probably talk about something a bit more technical to give it a
good balance, this panel.

Someone raised the issue of data streaming earlier in the chat. And, you
know, how much, how much have you all had to consider data streams.
Sorry, streams for data sharing I think he said. Um, I think it's an
interesting question, it's actually something that I, again, was working
on over at GDS before I left, and handed this over, but worked with
Companies House who have actually in-house standards for streaming data.
And looking at how they approached API development very differently and
the types of standards and things that they needed to think about. But
I, we did actually get this guidance agreed between, well, between me
and Companies House, but then when I brought it to our team of technical
architects within GDS to give us a yes or no on whether we get
published, it was actually some quite difficult questions they asked
around different types of methods of streaming and what, you know, the
definition of streaming and how we approach that.

So I think it's interesting, you know, whether we're talking about, you
know, a kind of event-driven architecture in terms of streaming or
whether we're talking about just kind of more common methods of web
streaming and, you know, whether it's web hooks or whatever it is, but
there's lots of different definitions so that question, could, I guess,
be interpreted in a number of different ways but maybe just open this up
to the panel on whether you have considered streaming and what you've
done in that area. Does anyone want to take that one on?

**Tony Heap**

I could talk about it and I got off mute quicker than Gair, so. HMRC -
HMRC, see I've done it now! - NHS digital, we've not really gone
anywhere near data streaming in terms of sort of continuous flow of data
but we've certainly done a lot historically and recently in terms of
outbound data and messaging formats. So, the original architecture for
the NHS was one of message flow, so when you move from one GP to
another, your data, your clinical data gets transferred, for example,
via, by messages from one GP surgery's IT system to another.

So it's been a thing that's been around for a while and it's always
something I think that developers have found difficult to integrate
with, because, you know, you not only have to call an API, you have to
stand something up that can receive inbound messages. And over the
years, a number of different patterns have popped up for that. So the
original pattern was you had to build a server that would sit and
receive messages on an HTTP port.

We then introduced a kind of a polling mechanism so you basically had
kind of an inbox of messages and then you would, you would poll at your
convenience, so you didn't have to build a server, you just had to build
a client. We have looked at web hooks as well, as another way of doing
it. And I don't necessarily think we've settled on any particular
architecture as been better than the other, I think sometimes, I
remember at HMRC with the Customs Service, we kind of offered both
options, so bigger high volume developers might want a server stood up
so they can receive stuff inbound and not have to poll, whereas smaller
ones that were just kind of low traffic, low tech etc just wanted a
polling API, rather than than a web hook, so it's probably horses for
courses.

**Jacqui Leggetter**

We've sent quite significant amounts of data to the devolved governments
so we send an awful lot of data to Scottish Government. We don't stream
it though because GDPR compliance all becomes really complex if you're
streaming data outside of your own boundary. We have a single API that
they call relating to a specific citizen and then we'll send a load of
data on the back of that one API call.

For us, streaming will be more linked to events, and our event driven
architecture. So looking at life events, a date of death, or a new birth
in a family, or a change of address, those kind of events. We'll have
those as common events that people subscribe to, and then we will
publish the event if they've subscribed to the topic. So that's how
we're doing streaming as opposed to streaming APIs.

The proactive streaming in terms of things like audit trail is something
that we're looking at, we should just have a continuous stream of the
audit data into the audit platform, so that's something that we will
likely look at but that's internal within the DWP boundary. So I think
that it would be rare for us to think about streaming anything outside.

**Gair McAdie**

I was largely gonna say this, I'm glad it's not just us, we largely have
the same thing where, you know, internally event driven is something
we're moving to and started adopting. You know, and we do use, SQS Queue
and SNS messaging internally rather than APIs for that. But externally
we've had calls for Graph API and, and maybe some streaming in one case
but but we, again, we steered away from them because they seem to give
us more problems and solution stuff for the scenarios we had. So like
you say, PII data, you know graph, as well, where, you know, security,
like has been very explicit about interfaces we hold with our third
parties, so it's probably one reason why we stay steered away from them.

**Rosalie Marshall**

Alright, so I hope that's given a good overview of, kind of, I think
there's, it's an interesting area, it's an area where everyone's kind of
turning their heads to at the moment. Hadn't, didn't really hear much
about it a number of years ago, but it's something that that keeps
coming up, so, and I think that guidance that GDS is working on may be
published soon so if anyone wants to input into it. Please just get in
touch with Charles, or Sarah, or indeed Annie, who might be actually
working on that guidance.

So I don't think we've, ah, there's a, oh, Mark is, Mark's on the call!
So, Mark is the person, one of the main people that I worked with on the
streaming guidance. He's at Companies House. So he's put his hand up and
said he's happy to discuss this in more detail so please reach out to
Mark if you are developing streaming standards or thinking about
streaming APIs. And then, you know, possibly we can actually get a bit
of community, a mini community around some of that.

### API Strategy

**Rosalie Marshall**

So, we have less than 10 minutes left on the panel. And can I just ask,
Charles and Sarah if there are questions in the new API Slack channel if
you could put them in the chat here so we're aware of them. I can't see
any more questions coming up unless I've missed one.

So, if we just think about some of the questions we were discussing on a
call before today with panel members. One of them was, and I'm selfishly
interested in this when looking at the home office technology strategy,
but just interested in those of you on the panel, who have either
published an API strategy or have one published somewhere internally or
agreed. What should an API strategy cover and what's the hallmark of a
good strategy? So this is open to any of you to jump in on.

**Tony Heap**

I'll tell you what we're up to at NHS digital, so I'm always keen to
find the answer to that as you, Rosalie. So, well, we, you know, we
started our API strategy with realising that what we already had needed
to be made better, so that's the API platform and then, you know, we
have a mission defined as being make integration easier. But recently,
we've started thinking beyond that so, that, sometimes you might refer
to that as doing, building the right thing. Okay, so building the
product right, a good quality product for the APIs that you're building.

Then the next questions are questions like, well, are we actually
building the right APIs in the first place? And that becomes really
tricky in our domain, and certainly for other public services as well
because the APIs tend to get commissioned by programmes who have already
decided what they want to do, sometimes in isolation, so you end up with
a little bit of silo thinking, and not always necessarily with, kind of,
the sort of discovery we like to do if we're starting from the ground
up. You know, understand the pain point and then work out actually, you
know, what is the right API to build for this? Sometimes it comes in
saying we want an API like this and you sort of get a little bit
constrained over what discovery and research you can do.

So that's, I don't have a solution to that problem, I'm just stating
that it's a problem, right, so are we building the right APIs is one
thing. The next thing is around, for us, around API marketing. So on the
one hand, build it and they shall come, but not necessarily. So how do
you get the word out there that the APIs are available, how do you reach
out beyond your existing community of incumbent developers to these
sorts of entrepreneurs that you said in your original API paper that you
were going to attract and disrupt the market and bring new and
innovative products to the healthcare space, you know, how do you find
those guys. There are places where they hang out, I guess, you know,
it's a big job to go and find them, so marketing feels like an important
thing.

And there's a couple of other things on our radar as well. One is API
marketplace, so do we open our API platform up to allow other people
outside of NHS digital, but within healthcare obviously, to publish APIs
on our platform? So for example, we're talking to the Department of
health and social care, other NHS trusts that are building services that
might be, or APIs that might be, useful beyond their trust. So that's
something we're keen to explore.

And that then kind of opens up a really interesting can of worms around
the governance process, so how do we then govern, and make sure that
everyone builds APIs, you know, to a consistent level, and security and
commercials and all sorts of interesting questions. And then the last
one is around an app marketplace, so do we provide a space for
developers to share what they've built using our APIs, so that they can
showcase them and find customers for them. So those are the questions on
our API strategy at the minute. We don't necessarily have answers for
them all yet.

**Rosalie Marshall**

Sounds like a mature API strategy as they go, or as they tend to go in
government. It's something, I guess with the NHS producing a large
number, many different things to think about and actually a lot of the
challenges that you've mentioned there, and how you overcome them, I
know, you know, we were thinking about at GDS in terms of how to
overcome them in a government-wide context. Jacqui, you've got a good
API strategy at DWP. What kind of, why do you think that's been, you
talked about this at the very beginning, so I don't want to ask you to
repeat all of that. I guess, what's the hallmark of a good strategy for
you?

**Jacqui Leggetter**

I think for me, there is a couple of components that need to be included
and one is, what is the outcome that you're trying to achieve? What is
the strategic fit, how does it fit with either, you know, a business
strategy, a technical strategy, and therefore it's hanging on the back
of a wider enterprise strategy. So an API strategy doesn't just sit on
its own. So it's about the, how it's enabling, and I think some of the
things that was, Tony mentioned there, absolutely agree.

And for me, there's something about defining in your strategy, what is
your strategy for making APIs look good? What is your API economy? So,
is your approach to have a federated model or a single team building
them? Is it layering good APIs? Do you keep your APIs granular? What are
the things that you're, are you trying to drive up reuse? Data sharing?
What are the core things that you're trying to achieve from your
strategy? And the evangelism, is there a central team that looks after,
is it a central platform, is it a federated platform? So there's things
like that that feed into your strategy as well that I think are just
really important.

**Rosalie Marshall**

Thanks Jacqui. Gair or Katie, do you have anything on the strategy side?
Gair, you're, you're still on mute.

**Gair McAdie**

I'm not, I'm just moving my mouth again. So yeah, I looked for our DVLA
strategy, and the closest thing I found was a data sharing strategy
which actually does talk a lot about sharing via APIs, and I think
that's kind of what it comes down to is that it's hard to put a value on
an API, whereas with a web offering you can count number of customers,
how quickly and easily they can interact with your business, but with
APIs you basically just have a single consumer, but they can share your
data with hundreds 1000s or even millions of consumers, you know, that,
we as government departments may not have large IT teams that are able
to leverage all the data and get, reach all of our audience through UIs
which are obviously a lot harder to build, not only the data for the UI
but the UI itself. With an API, you know, it should be less of an
overhead and enable third parties to do some of that work for you.

So we've got a real mix, I guess, you know, of APIs for different sort
of consumer basis from from a single to hundreds of users. So it does
come down to that data sharing and as Jacqui says, what's the intended
audience. So, yeah, I think it's something that, GDS has published
guidance on, was it being API-first? Many, many, more than a decade ago
wasn't it?

**Rosalie Marshall**

Yeah, that's right, Martha Lane Fox, yeah. We are pretty much out of
time but just wanted to give Katie that last opportunity to just comment
on strategy.

**Katie Longstaff**

Yeah. So for us, our strategy was to, you know, make sure that there's
more innovation in the market space, that Tony touched on previously,
and also try and reduce costs because people, you know, they think that
APIs are expensive but if you build a good API and have that out for
people to use and you get these innovative third party software
developers building products to consume your API, you know, try and, you
know, move away from having web services for some things.

So an example of that is our Making Tax Digital. You know, we've got the
VAT API that's out there for software developers to use and build
products for, and eventually we will be turning off the HMRC software.
You know, so you won't be able to go online and file a HMRC VAT return
via HMRC website anymore, it'll all be done via third party software. So
because we're turning off that channel, it means that new people will
actually be encouraged to come along and build products that haven't
built things before. And if you build your APIs in such a way that they
may be a bit smaller, a bit more granular APIs, rather than a big
monolith, people might be able to take elements of that API and reuse it
for other things.

So, for example, as part of self assessment people have been looking at
APIs to reuse them to not only file a self assessment tax return but
check whether someone can claim expenses and get a refund on, say, a car
mileage and things like that. So, yeah, it's building APIs in a way to,
you know, stimulate that demand and reduce costs. That's what we've been
focusing on with our strategy.

**Rosalie Marshall**

It's exciting that both you and Jacqui, you know, mentioned API reuse.
And that's coming up more and more, and, you know, is possibly an
objective of the API catalogue, as well. So it's, I just, I say it's
exciting because it feels like we are on a journey here and it's, you
know, it's been thought more and more about reusing APIs.

I remember at the DWP API community event a few years ago, that Jacqui
hosted for us all, Richard Banes from your team, Katie, did a talk about
what they are thinking in terms of reusing APIs and we can probably
share that presentation if people are interested in it. But that was
relatively early days, I think, when when everyone was just beginning to
start thinking about reuse a bit more. And now it's, you know, it's
just, you know, part of the strategy that people are thinking about.

### Panel Closing

**Rosalie Marshall**

We are, I think, we're pretty much out of time, I thought we had an hour
and a half, but just looking at the schedule, we could go on for another
five minutes. I know there are questions about bulk data transfers and
how to manage those in the chat, so those seem to be, they're being
handled, I think Jacqui's kind of answered. If other panel members want
to get back in the chat about bulk data transfers because I don't know
five minutes will be enough, unless anyone wants to jump in from the
panel on that quickly. So, not seeing anyone jump in, so I think
conversations over chat should work on that.

There was a point made from William, who has recently joined government
after working in open banking and again makes a comment about streaming.
And so, so that's an interesting conversation that's coming up. But
yeah, I think what we'll do is, because you know there's possibly four
or five minutes left, depending on whether I've got the timings right,
we'll call this panel to a close, and I think, you know, if anyone's got
any further questions for panel members, I would say feel free to put
them in the chat or to, you know, we can perhaps connect you to the
panel members after so you can follow up with them individually.

But a very special thank you for, a special thank you, a very big thank
you from me to all the panel members for taking those questions. And
also, you know, we never really said, I never really said goodbye to you
all in person before I left GDS but, you know, a big thanks to all that
you did for the government API community in helping create standards and
guidance for the rest of the community to use and to help create more
consistency in our development. So just wanted to say thanks for today
and thanks also for the number of years and work you've put in. So, I
think with that...

**Tony Heap**

I'm welling up here, Rosalie.

**Rosalie Marshall**

I'll hand over.

**Sarah Johns**

You can hand over to me, yeah, Rosalie. I just wanted to say a humongous
thank you, live from my kitchen while I'm also cooking my kids' lunch.
Thank you to Rosalie for amazing chairing and such an interesting
conversation, and thank you so much for our panellists Gair, Jacqui,
Katie, and Tony, for sharing their immense experience and learning for
us all. I'm new to APIs and new to this community, I've just learned so
much in this last 90 minutes. So, really, really, loads of, thank you
for taking part there.

## 3. Digital Object Identifiers - Terence Eden, Data Standards Authority

**Sarah Johns**

So next up we have Terence Eden, from the Data Standards Authority,
talking about his work on digital object identifiers.

**Terence Eden**

I hope you can all hear me okay. And you should now be able to see some
very exciting slides,

**Sarah Johns**

We can see that. Very Cabinet Office slides. Yeah,

**Terence** **Eden**

Look at that, isn't it amazing when technology works? Hi everyone, my
name is Terence Eden, I work in the Data Standards Authority, and I want
to talk to you today about this: DOIs. Digital Object Identifiers. Some
of you are going to be familiar with these, some aren't, so I'm going to
start by saying this: DOI, WTF? Which I'm reliably informed stands for
"Wednesday, Thursday, Friday".

Digital Object Identifiers are a way to identify digital objects, such
as government documents. DOIs are really well used in the academic
sector, so lots of datasets and lots of academic publications have a
DOI, which means that academics are able to cite documents really
easily.

We've been given a challenge on how we can make government datasets more
accessible to researchers. So, we've been looking at DOIs. In true GDS
fashion, we start with user needs. I'm going to tell you a bit about
what these are and how they sort of tie in with the API work we're
doing. So, this is the primary user need that we're serving which is:
"As an academic, I want a simple way to cite government data." At the
moment, when an academic cites government data or a government document,
they tend to use a URL, so www.gov.uk/ this/that/the-other. That's okay.
but it comes with a few drawbacks.

The first one is is that sometimes URLs change. They shouldn't, but
sometimes they do. And the second issue is, there is no way to get
metadata out of a URL. I mean, you might be able to get the domain name,
if we've marked up the document properly you might be able to get the
date, but anything more complicated than that, you're simply not going
to be able to get.

So we have a second user need which is: "As a publisher I want to track
the usage of government datasets." So, we know that government data is
important and government publishes, you know, terabytes of data, every
month. But who's using it? At some point, a chief executive or a
Director General or a minister is going to turn around and say, "We're
publishing all of this data, who's using it? Is this good value for
money?" and we're going to need to be able to show that it is, or show
that it isn't.

One of the great things about using DOIs is they are really easy to
search for and there are a lot of, there are a lot of metadata search
APIs which allow you to say, as an academic, show me all the times that
my paper has been cited in other papers. Which means that as a publisher
of data, the government can say, show me all the times that government
documents have been cited. Fantastic.

So that's a sort of overview of why we're trying to do it. I'm going to
talk a little about the practicalities. So, this is what a DOI looks
like. It is a singularly unlovely string of numbers, and it is not
designed to be human readable, there is not designed to have any
metadata in this. The '10.' indicates that this is a DOI. The numbers
after the dot is the organisation who publishes, and then the string
after that is the unique reference.

So, the idea is that you create a dataset, you then create a DOI to go
with it, you put the DOI in the dataset and when an academic comes
along, they say, oh, this is, what a brilliant piece of data about some
amazing government thing! I want to include this in my thesis, in my
document, my published paper. How do I do that? Well, I take this DOI
and then I send it to an API, so, and there are lots of different
commercial and non commercial APIs out there, a whole bunch of
decentralised APIs. You submit a DOI and you get back - I've included a
scrap here - metadata about this document. So, who published it, when
was it published, what sort of document is it, when was it last updated,
what language is it in? All of these sorts of things which are, you
know, vital for academics understanding who they're citing, why they're
citing, you know, putting references in, and also really useful for
text, for data mining as well, if we want to understand what documents
are cited the most, which publishers are cited the most, this is, you
know, sort of, absolutely vital.

So this does come with some API challenges for government as well. But
this is why we want to do this. One, we know that URLs die, or they
change. There is no consistent way to get metadata out of government
documents. Tracking URLs to see who's been citing our data is hard. But
most importantly, this is the way. This is the scheme that 100% of
academics have converged on. They want to use API, uh, they want to use
DOIs. And if we want to serve our user needs, we need to start using
them.

But it comes with some hard questions. So, there will have to be some
changes to the way we publish data on GOV. UK to include DOIs. Is this
going to add friction? So, are we going to need to create our own DOI
API, which is a bit of a tongue twister, in order to automate the
creation of this metadata? Is that going to add time and friction when
people want to publish data?

Really important, for example, when we're publishing COVID-19 stats. You
know, people want them at a minute past midnight every single day. Does,
you know, integrating this delay the publication of vital stats? Is it
going to confuse normal people? I mean, if you've never encountered a
DOI before and you see that string of numbers, what does that tell you?
Do we need more explainers? Do we need, you know, a way to signal to
people that, look, this probably isn't for you, this is for a specific
community.

And are there privacy concerns? So as I said, there are a bunch of APIs
where you can retrieve DOI metadata, but, what are they doing with your
data? So when you go to, I'll pick one at random, you know, data site
and you say, please give me all the metadata for this DOI. Is their API
recording that you're looking at that? Probably not, but we have to be
aware of that. Does that mean that we need to create an API specifically
so that if people want to look up government DOIs without giving their
data to anyone else, they can do it, for us, maybe. Do we need to create
a DOI, uh an API, so that people can create their own DOIs? Almost
certainly. We're talking to the British Library about using theirs.

This has just been a whistlestop tour of these things and we do have
further readings, so we've published a blog post, explaining this in a
bit more detail. We're also running a consultation on GitHub at the
moment where we've had loads of responses from academics and publishers
and people of government, and normal users, all, you know, talking about
whether this is a good thing, how an API for this would work.

And so I'm really interested in hearing your feedback. I'm happy to take
it today, happy to take it over the next few weeks. What do you think
about the idea of creating metadata for government records, via an API
and retrieving it via an API, all backed by DOIs? Thank you very much.

### Questions

**Terence Eden**

I'm gonna stop sharing and come back here and take a look and see what
questions we have. So I'm just going to scroll back. If anyone's, can't
type in and wants to just shout out please unmute yourself and and come
on now.

**Charles Baird**

Can I jump in, Terence? I was gonna ask you something. I appreciate
that, you know, I'm on the inside so I should know all this stuff
already, but I'm just interested, can you talk a little bit about how
the infrastructure works in, you know, obviously this stuff is, you're
producing them but presumably this is backed by a database of these
things, you know.

**Terence Eden**

That's exactly right. Yeah. So, the technical term for it is "minting" a
DOI. So, because you own the prefix 10.1234, you can mint a DOI which is
the, sort of, the entire string, just on your database. So what you do,
effectively, is, well with the British Library one there's a form, you
type in all the metadata, so the name of the author, the date and
everything, you hit go, it generates a unique ID for you, which it
stores in the database, and then it distributes around.

So you might think of it a bit like DNS, a Domain Name System for the
internet. So, you can query any name server, and find out where a domain
name points to, you can query any DOI database record, and it will bring
back the metadata for you. But yes, it is minted just for you, and
updated just by you as well.

**Charles Baird**

So in principle, the, in this kind of instance the government would run
the equivalent of a name server for DOIs, which would be the ones that
we'd minted.

**Terence Eden**

Yes, effectively, but then of course once they get published, they get
distributed so they don't necessarily hit back. But, and again, the idea
that we have is that, we are really bad at updating metadata in
government, so what we're hoping for is that, to make, if we can make it
easier, whether via an API or a form or something else, that will
encourage people to update their metadata and then that gets distributed
around the entire system as well.

**Charles Baird**

Fair enough. Okay, I'll stop taking up time and let, you've got hundreds
of questions so I'll let you go.

**Terence Eden**

Right, so Jon says "DOIs have a much wider audience than academics."
Yes, that's absolutely right. And one of the things that we're looking
at is, we're starting with a small trial with datasets, I think we'll
probably go with Office for National Statistics first, but it is
possible that, you know, you could put a DOI on every paper and
announcement, you know, made on GOV.uk.

**Terence Eden**

"How granular are DOIs? Is it just for datasets as a whole or specific
rows or a field?" Paul, that's an excellent question. At the moment, it
is for the dataset as a whole. So, the idea is, you know, here is your,
you know, 10MB CSV, that has a single DOI.

Now, as we move into an API future, web apps aren't going to be
publishing datasets like that anymore. We'll be asking people to
retrieve something from a, from an API. So you could, and this is a
future proposal, you could associate a DOI with an API query, just to
say, look, this is the API query that I had, and here is the DOI which,
you know, gets that. Or you could say, here is a DOI for that specific
database at that specific time. Still working on that.

Timothy likes DOIs for datasets but prefers URNs for things like SPARQL.
That's a very reasonable point, Timothy, we would love it if you'd post
in the GitHub link, which is on the slides and hopefully someone can
stick in the chat, because one of the things we want is a bit of
dissenting opinion as well.

"How does versioning work with DOIs?" Again, Mateusz, brilliant
question. So, this is my understanding of it, is that, generally
speaking, if you publish an updated dataset, let's say that you've got
deaths from COVID-19 and then a few days later you think, oh crikey, you
know, we missed some off we need to republish it. What you would do is
in the metadata, so you would give a DOI to the first dataset, and in
the metadata of that you would say, this has been updated in DOI for the
dataset over there. So that's what you want to try to do so a DOI should
be, as I understand it, fixed at a point in time for a specific data
set. If you update it, gets a new DOI but you can link between them.

"If the data resource moves, how does the DOI still point to it?" Yep.
Again. So this all comes down to metadata. So in your metadata fields,
you'll have the name, the author, date, blah blah blah, and you will
also have the URL where this resource lives. So, if we, you know, if we
decide that we no longer want to be gov.uk/data, and instead
gov.uk/api/data, you would go into the metadata of that DOI - well, the
owner of the document would go into the metadata of that DOI - and
update the record to show where it points.

Now, there is an interesting point here, in that, you know, what happens
if we decide to delete a document or we never update metadata? Well, one
of the things about DOIs is, because they are distributed, other people
can take copies of your dataset or document and provide them via the
DOI. So if you're at a university, for example, you might go to your
university library and say, here's a DOI for this, and they would serve
you up a local copy of the paper, or the dataset. So, even if we do
forget to update our metadata, the documents will still be out there for
other people to cite.

**Terence Eden**

I think that's all the questions, unless there are any on Slack that
I've missed, Charles? Or anyone else?

**Charles Baird**

Nothing on Slack. Again, it's like a personal attack. But just on that
note, I've put your slides on there, and I've also put direct links to
the two things for feedback so people can get to our GitHub repo from
there, and to the blog post as well.

**Terence Eden**

Brilliant. Well, my contact details are on those slides. If you have any
questions about this, any thoughts, any concerns especially, please,
please, please drop me an email or go onto GitHub and leave a comment
there. Our plan is, as we move through this year, we'll start off a
trial, doing DOIs, probably having the British Library as our partner to
publish them, and probably using Office for National Statistics as our
trial partner. But if you would really like to be our trial partner,
please do drop me a note.

**Sarah Johns**

We've got someone called Jon Johnson with their hand up.

**Charles Baird**

Oh yes.

**Sarah Johns**

Jon I don't know if you're still there and if you want to unmute
yourself. Let me allow you to unmute.

**Terence Eden**

So Jon has shared a copy of a DOI for an ONS thing from the UK data
service, which, you know, looks good. So, that, hopefully you can take a
look at that and get an idea of what we're doing with them. But Jon, are
you, are you there?

**Charles Baird**

Think Jon's having some technical issues.

**Gair McAdie**

Well, I think he's not a presenter, he's, he's not allowed to unmute.

**Sarah Johns**

Hold on. Hold on. Hold on. Hold on.

**Terence Eden**

We got pretty far, well done everyone!

**John Johnson**

Just to say, I mean, I mean I work in the university although I'm not an
academic. I used to work at data, the UK data service. But it is one of
those sort of frustrations really of generically across using government
data, is that it's very difficult to know what version you're using. You
know, so even something that you'd think would be nailed down quite
tightly, like employment classifications, you know, it's published as a
PDF. But the PDF's not even versioned. You know, it's just, and it
causes, you know, mayhem, which is why, you know, you're doing what
you're doing, you know, at the end of the day.

And the good thing about DOIs is it, you know, I think it does package
up definitive things, consumable objects as opposed to individual items
which you can get through APIs. And I think it will make a significant
difference in terms of provenancing what's going on because a lot of the
misreporting is primarily down to just not knowing the provenance of
things like, even things like region and basic geographies and things
like that. So that's a quite an important part of an infrastructure that
can be relied upon.

**Terence Eden**

Yeah, I think you're exactly right. We know that there is a problem with
publishing PDFs and then they get silently updated. Obviously, you know,
a DOI by itself doesn't help that, but hopefully it will encourage
people to think more about those things.

A really interesting question, sorry, has just come in from Mateusz,
which is "Is DOI only for public data?" That's a heck of a question. So,
I mean, in theory, no, you could, you know, if you have a top secret
data set of whatever, you could assign a DOI to it. If people found that
DOI they would be able to find the metadata for it but they wouldn't
necessarily be able to retrieve the document if it was on a private
intranet for example. I'm not sure what the, I'm not sure whether it
would be helpful to add DOIs to private data, but if you think there's a
use case for it then yeah, that's definitely something we'd look at. I
really haven't considered it before.

## 4. Closing remarks

**Charles Baird**

We've run out of questions, but thank you so much, Terence, that was
really interesting. And even for those of us like me who have, who are
supposed to have listened to that presentation before, it was great.

I just wanted to close up today with a huge thanks to all of our
speakers to Terence, to Jacqui, and Katie, and Tony, and Gair on the
panel, and especially to Rosalie for, both for hosting that today and
for all of her contributions to the API community over the last few
years, obviously we wouldn't be here without you. I've no idea if you're
on the call so this might be, you know, just shouting into the void.

But hopefully, all of you guys will sign up for the next one of these,
which will be, as I said, as Sarah says, rather, at the end of February,
for, with a focus on geospatial.

In the meantime, you can see on screen, do get in touch with us at any
of those email addresses. Please do sign up for the Slack. It is, as I
say, it's experimental. We may well end up folding it back into
cross-government Slack, we'll see how it goes, but it's a good place to
share this kind of stuff, and to chat between meetings.

And one last plug for the various parts of the new API programme. We'll
send out something on the Google group next week about the GitHub, and
the data standards catalogue for you to have a look at and start to
contribute to. I've already mentioned Slack so that's pointless notes,
and finally just another call out because it was sort of in the middle
of my presentation earlier, for, if anyone is interested in being an
assessor for our prototype API assessment programme, then we would
welcome you with open arms.

So with that, thanks again to everyone who spoke thanks to, thanks for
all of you to coming, and we look forward to seeing you at the end of
February, and for, and to speaking to you on Slack - shameless, the last
shameless plug - in the meantime. So enjoy the rest of your day and
thanks again.
